SH1804
03 Handout 1 *Property of STI
 student.feedback@sti.edu Page 1 of 2
Conditionals and Loops
I. The if Statement
 A conditional statement that allows JS scripts and applications to perform different actions
based given conditions.
 A block of code will be executed based on the resulting value of an evaluated condition.
 If the condition is not satisfied, the code block within the statement will be skipped and the
script/application will continue with program execution after the statement.
 Other variations of this conditional statement exist through the use of additional JS
keywords and conditions.
A. The if-else Statement
 A more complex version of the if statement.
 Uses the else keyword that allows the declaration of a code block for statements that
will be executed if the condition returns a Boolean value of false.
B. The if-else-if Statement
 Yet another version of the if statement.
 Uses the else-if statement (written as else if) that allows for multiple code blocks to be
executed when their conditions are satisfied.
 Any condition whose condition is not satisfied will be skipped.
 If no preceding conditions were satisfied, the else statement at the end of the entire
conditional statement will be executed instead.
II. The switch Statement
 An alternative conditional statement to the if-else-if statement, as if-else-if statements may
be cumbersome and may not always be the best solution for conditional statements.
 Allows the testing of multiple conditions through the use of case statements; each case
statement contains a possible match to a condition value, usually derived from an evaluated
expression (basically, a condition).
 If a case statement matches the condition value, it then executes its code block.
 If no match has been found for the listed cases, the default statement will be executed
instead.
 It is important to always put a break statement at the end of the code block for each case
statement; forgetting to do so will execute ALL succeeding case statements after one is
satisfied.
III. The for Loop
 One of many possible looping constructs in JS, which allow the execution of code for a set
number of times, which is handy for running code that needs to be run repeatedly.
 Is considered as the most commonly used loop.
 Consists primarily of three (3) statements, each divided by a semicolon (;), for its condition
block:
1. The first statement contains any statements executed before the loop starts, such as
declaration of relevant variables (usually counter variables).
2. The second statement contains the actual condition or expression to be evaluated for the
loop.
3. The third statement contains any statements executed after the loop has been executed,
such as incrementing or decrementing of relevant variables.

-- 1 of 2 --

SH1804
03 Handout 1 *Property of STI
 student.feedback@sti.edu Page 2 of 2
 The loop’s code block will be executed a number of times based on the condition block’s
values.
IV. The while Loop
 A loop that repeats a block of code as long as the condition returns a Boolean value of true.
 The condition, however, can also be altered so that the loop repeats when the condition
returns a value of false.
 All while loops will return ONLY Boolean values.
 Developers must never forget to increase the counter variable used in the condition so that
it will eventually return a false value; forgetting to do so will result in an infinite loop.
V. The do-while Loop
 Considered as a variant of the while loop
 This loop will execute the code block once, before checking if the condition is true, and
then it will repeat the loop as long as the condition is true.
VI. break and continue
A. The break Statement
 A statement used to break the execution of a code block, such as those in conditional
statements and loops.
 The script or application will continue with the execution of the rest of the code after
breaking the execution of the code block containing the statement.
 The break statement can also be used to interrupt the execution of a code block through
the use of additional conditional statements.
B. The continue Statement
 A statement primarily used in loops.
 It breaks a single iteration of a loop and continues with the next iteration.
 This statement is useful whenever a certain value or iteration needs to be skipped in
order to acquire more specific values and/or data.
Reference:
 SoloLearn. (n.d.) JavaScript Tutorial. Retrieved on April 6, 2018 at
https://www.sololearn.com/Course/JavaScript/
 SoloLearn. (n.d.) jQuery Tutorial. Retrieved on April 6, 2018 at
https://www.sololearn.com/Course/jQuery/

-- 2 of 2 --

