SH1804
04 Handout 1 *Property of STI
 student.feedback@sti.edu Page 1 of 2
Functions
I. Defining Functions
A. What is a function?
 It is a block of code designed to perform a particular task.
 It allows reusability of code; written code need only be defined once, and it can be used
as many times as possible.
 It also allows the usage of arguments to produce different kinds of results.
 It is declared using the function keyword, followed by a specified name (it can be any
valid variable name) followed by a set of parentheses (( )). The function’s code block
is written in between a pair of curly braces ({ }).
B. Calling Functions
 These are methods in JS that allow the execution of a function’s code block.
 Done using the function’s name, followed by any optional arguments within the
following pair of parentheses.
 JS allows a function to be called as many times as needed.
II. Function Parameters
 These are any variable names listed within a functions argument definition.
 Defined parameters then become function arguments that can be used to hold or receive
user-supplied or defined values for use within the function’s statements.
III. Using Multiple Parameters
 Functions can accommodate multiple parameters for multiple possible values.
 Multiple parameters are defined within functions using their declared names and separated
with commas (,).
 Once parameters are declared, they can then be used within the function’s statements.
IV. Function Value Return
 Functions can have an optional return statement.
 The return statement for functions work in the same way as return statements for methods.
 Return statements are useful for returning results from functions that work with calculation
and evaluation of values and/or expressions.
 When JavaScript reaches a return statement, the function stops executing.
V. Function Boxes
 These are popup boxes that allow the display of different types of function output.
 Specific function boxes may require specific data, such as supplied input values from a user,
or confirmation for an executed task.
A. The Alert Box
 A function box used when a JS application must ensure that the user gets the information
that is displayed.
 The user must click a confirmative OK button in order to proceed.
 It takes a single parameter: the text to be displayed within the function box.
 To display line breaks within a popup box, use a backslash (\) followed by the
lowercase character n.

-- 1 of 2 --

SH1804
04 Handout 1 *Property of STI
 student.feedback@sti.edu Page 2 of 2
B. The Prompt Box
 A function box used to require a user to give values as input before entering a JS-enabled
page or application.
 When a prompt box pops up, the user will have to click either OK or Cancel to proceed
after entering the input value.
 If the user clicks OK, the box returns the input value. If the user clicks Cancel, the box
returns null.
 It takes two (2) parameters: the label which is the text displayed in the text box, and the
string which becomes the default string value that is displayed within the text box.
C. The Confirm Box
 A function box used to have the user verify of accept something.
 When the box pops up, the user must click either OK or Cancel to proceed.
 The returned Boolean value depends on user choice: If the user clicks OK, the box
returns true. If the user clicks Cancel, the box returns false.
References:
 SoloLearn. (n.d.) JavaScript Tutorial. Retrieved on April 6, 2018 at
https://www.sololearn.com/Course/JavaScript/
 SoloLearn. (n.d.) jQuery Tutorial. Retrieved on April 6, 2018 at
https://www.sololearn.com/Course/jQuery/

-- 2 of 2 --

