SH1804
06 Handout 1 *Property of STI
Page 1 of 2
Arrays
I. What are Arrays?
 It is a common programming mechanic known as a data structure.
 It is the simplest data-storing structure in any programming language.
 In JS, it allows scripts and applications to store multiple values in a single variable.
A. Accessing Arrays
 Array elements can be accessed by referring to their index number written in square
brackets ([ ]).
 Index numbers start with zero (0) instead of one (1); the first element of the array is
designated with the index number of zero (0), while the last element is designated by
the total array element value subtracted by one (1) (n – 1, where n stands for the total
array element value).
 Attempting to access an array element using an index number HIGHER than the
maximum array element value will return the undefined value.
II. Creating Arrays
A. Specifying Array Properties
 Arrays are considered a special type of object in JS.
 During declaration, an array can be customized by also declaring the maximum number
of elements it can contain.
 Values for elements can also be added individually later; this is usually done by
referring their element number and assigning the values individually.
 Since JS arrays are also dynamic like JS variables, an array can also be declared without
passing any arguments; this is done by not adding any specific argument within the
Array constructor’s parentheses pair.
 An array declared dynamically can also have their elements added dynamically; the
syntax for adding individual element values is used.
B. Array Literals
 A method of array declaration that allows for greater simplicity, readability, and
execution speed.
 Uses a specific syntax for its declaration; the syntax involves the usage of simply the
possible element values enclosed with a pair of square brackets ([ ]).
 The array literal syntax is the recommended way to declare arrays, due to its simplicity
and execution speed.
III. Array Properties and Methods
A. The length Property
 One of JS’ built-in properties for declared array objects
 It is used to return the total number of an array’s elements.
B. Combining Arrays
 Arrays can be combined through concatenation.
 The concat() method can be used to join two (2) existing arrays to create a new one:

-- 1 of 2 --

SH1804
06 Handout 1 *Property of STI
Page 2 of 2
1. The array that uses the concat() method as its object property will become the first
array. The first array will be joined to the second array at its ending element value.
2. The array that is declared as a parameter of the concat() method will become the
second array. The second array is joined to the first array at its beginning element
value.
IV. Associative Arrays
 JS, unlike other programming languages, does not support the creation of associative arrays
(arrays with named indexes; indexes use text instead of numbers, such as variable names).
 As an alternative, the named array syntax can be used, which produces an object; elements
of the “array” object become properties of the object that can be referred.
References:
Sololearn.com. JavaScript Tutorial. Retrieved on April 17, 2018:
https://www.sololearn.com/Course/JavaScript/
Sololearn.com. jQuery Tutorial. Retrieved on April 17, 2018:
https://www.sololearn.com/Course/jQuery/

-- 2 of 2 --

